---
title: Dirtywave M8
date: October 28, 2024
---

# Dirtywave M8 {.green}
##### October 28, 2024

---

### Introduction {.green}

I'm **VERY** late writing this article, but I still wanted to get it
out, especially before any new models or manuals are released. While it
will feel slightly off and potentially missing some information, this
will be a page that I come back to and add to over time, and as I learn
more. I've spent a lot of time in 2024 getting used to the M8 and really
building out my workflow with the device, and I think the things I've
learned and tips I've gathered may be useful to others.

### Some Background... {.green}

In high school, I found [8bitpeoples](http://www.8bitpeoples.com/) and
started exploring chiptune. I eventually found and played with 
[LSDJ](https://www.littlesounddj.com/lsd/index.php) and
[Nanoloop](https://www.nanoloop.com/one/index.html) (and much later 
[Deflemask](https://www.deflemask.com/)). 

![Nanoloop and midi
adapter](images/m8/nanoloop_midi.png){width=50%}![lsdj](images/m8/lsdj.png){width=50%}

For years I played with these, but never very seriously, and had never 
created anything that I'd be willing to share with others. I started by 
emulating LSDJ on my PC, but eventually purchased a flash cart to run 
LSDJ, purchased a Nanoloop One with a link cable midi adapter, and had 
fun messing around with them making cool sounds and *almost* making 
music. I was into chiptune, even if I couldn't make it myself, and 
eventually attended a few [8STATIC](https://www.8static.com) events, 
including one that I have (crappy) photographic evidence of, [8STATIC
0C](https://www.8static.com/events.php). I saw a few different chiptune 
artists perform here, and typically would try to follow them on social 
media or their webpages/8bitpeoples releases. One of those artists was 
Trash80 (Timothy Lamb of Dirtywave).


| ![Trash80 at 8STATIC 0C](images/m8/trash80_1_20091115.jpg){ width=50% }![Trash80 at 8STATIC 0C](images/m8/trash80_0_20091115.jpg){ width=50% } |
|:--:|
| *Two pictures of Trash80 at 8STATC 0C... taken on an LG Dare* |


At some point in 2020, I started noticing Twitter posts about
the M8, and it started to look pretty attractive to me. While I had
never created or released any music in my previous attempts to use
various chiptune software/devices, it was 2020 and I had enough
disposable income that I was willing to take the risk that this would be
something I'd end up selling in a few years (I'm also a sucker for tiny
cool electronic devices).  When one of the pre-order groups for the 
[Model:01](https://dirtywave.com/products/m8-tracker) opened in April 
2021. From 2021-2023 I used it on and off making sounds and beats, but 
kind of still just "playing around" and never really making any real 
songs or any kind of music that I'd be willing to share. Towards the end
of 2023, I started forcing myself to use the M8 instead of wasting time
([listening to what Red Means Recording said in his M8 introduction
video](https://youtu.be/jMxDGkXlb0k?si=Gm2aiJAYOeHeyhNj&t=60)). Also at
the end of 2023, I started hearing about 
[Weeklybeats](https://weeklybeats.com/) on the [Dirtywave 
discord](https://discord.gg/WEavjFNYHh). I made the decision in December
to participate, which felt a little overly optimistic, but I wanted to
challenge myself.


Starting in January of 2024 I started releasing a song every week while
I participated in Weeklybeats. Some songs have been pretty... bad... but
I'm still putting in the effort every week. During this time, I also
purchased a second M8, the 
[Model:02](https://dirtywave.com/products/m8-tracker-model-02). At the
time I started writing this post, the year isn't over yet; but I've
learned a lot about the device and some tips and tricks that aren't
included in the manual. I think it's worth sharing what I've learned and
things that can help others who are looking to start using the device.
Coming at this from my not-super-musically-inclined and as a person who
hasn't released any music prior, I think it might be a somewhat unique
perspective compared to other peoples' reviews.  Over time, I'll continue 
to update this page with new things I learn, or links to official docs
and references..

## Model:01 vs Model:02 {.yellow}

---

I still have and use my 01, but after experiencing all the points I laid
out below, it makes me want to get a second 02 device. The 02 is a
worthy upgrade, and if you're on the fence about switching from the 01,
I'd highly recommend it.

![Model1 and Model2](images/m8/both.png){width=100%}\

### Finish{.green}

Obviously, the look of the 02 is much more polished. It feels much nicer
in the hand and makes the 01 feel like an early/beta model. The Model:01
has an  aluminum shell over the back and sides of the unit, but the 
front face is a coated PCB. It looks really cool, but in comparison, the 
02 looks like a more finished product. The screen size is physically 
larger on the 02, but even more noticeable to me is the fact that it's a 
better-fitting screen, where the entirety of the screen is centered on 
the device. It's also worth mentioning that the Micro SD and power 
button feel much more premium, and finished compared to the 01:

![Power Button](images/m8/power.png){width=100%}\

The character size is larger as well, though this is also a configurable
option that came with [3.1.0
firmware](https://github.com/Dirtywave/M8Firmware/blob/main/changelog.txt).
Overall, the screen size, and the finish are the most obvious when
you're just looking at the device. Overall I don't think they change my
overall experience/use; but I think that the screen could be a game
changer for some people.

### Battery{.green}

The most notable change for me was the battery size. The 01 had a
1200mAh battery, which didn't seem too bad until you used it away from
an outlet/power for a couple of hours. I took mine to [PAX
East](https://east.paxsite.com/) multiple times, and always carried a
spare battery pack with me to charge. While annoying, it wasn't enough
to make the device unusable and it was still really cool to take the
device with me. I couldn't find the exact specs for the battery in the
02, but it feels like it lasts forever! I want to say **I've used it
10-15 hours between charges**, which is crazy long in comparison and 
great for traveling. It is such a quality-of-life improvement, I've 
actually considered tinkering with my 01 to see if I could get a larger 
battery in it (I think some folks on the Dirtywave discord may have done
this).

### Microphone {.green}

While it's not the highest quality microphone, it is great to have a
simple way to record samples directly from the M8. I've used it to put
stubs of samples in, helping me put a song together before I had all the
final pieces. I had been looking around for a decent tiny microphone to
throw in a bag with my M8, but never decided on one. Now that I have the
Model 02, it's a moot point - I can just use the device without any
additional equipment. Many people have mentioned that they can now use 
this in the field to get recordings, and while I'd like to say I've done
 that... I haven't (yet). It works well and it's a nice addition to the 
02, and something that I've used more often than I initially expected.

### USB-C {.green}

This one isn't entirely obvious just looking at the device, but the 02
swaps out a micro-USB connection for a USB-C connection. Functionally
this isn't a major change, but it was something that actually became a
bit painful for me when traveling with the 01. A few times I had
forgotten to take a micro-USB since all of my other devices use USB-C.
Now I can be more consistent with what I carry, and don't need to worry
about a separate cable for my M8.

## Tips {.yellow}

---

### TEMPLATE Song {.green}

<div class="code">
```bash

  SONG                                           
                                                 
       1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8       T>120 
  00 >10 >FE >FE  FE  FE  FE  FE  FE             
  01  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       1 --- 
  02  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       2 --- 
  03  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       3 --- 
  04  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       4 --- 
  05  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       5 --- 
  06  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       6 --- 
  07  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       7 --- 
  08  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       8 --- 
  09  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --             
  0A  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --             
  0B  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --             
  0C  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --             
  0D  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --             
  0E  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       P     
  0F  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       SCPIT 
  0G  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --       V     


```
</div>

The screen above is what I see when I start a new track on my M8. This
is because you can create a default template that will be used each time
you create a new song. The feature was added in firmware 1.1.0, and can
utilized by **saving a song called TEMPLATE in the /System directory**.
The two things that are worth mentioning in my template are that I start
the first track with a 10 chain, which is just made up of four empty 10 
phrases. This is because I *generally* use 1X for the first track, 2X
for the second track, and so on. In a chain, I generally keep the same
pattern as well. Towards tracks 7 and 8 I get a bit more lax with that;
but keeping that general pattern helps me keep all my phrases and chains
sorted in my head. Starting my template by filling out the first track
simply shortens the first set of notes I lay down. I could create a
default four-phrase chain for each of the tracks, but since I usually
don't know how many tracks I'll use, I don't want to have a bunch of
random unused phrases/chains in my song.

The second piece of my template that's worth mentioning is the FE and FD
chains. FE is a four phrase chain with no notes. At the start, this is
essentially the same as the 10 chain/phrase; but I leave FE empty to use
as a filler in my tracks. This is a common practice; though, sometimes
folks do this with 00 instead of FE - I prefer FE because I *sometimes*
will use 0X phrases/chains for noises and effects. The FD chain is very
similar to the FE chain, except that the first phrase in the chain is
FD, which contains three KIL00 effects. This is essentially my way of
stopping whatever building effects/sounds I have, without mangling up
chains/phrases to do something fancy. I've considered making some other
default chains and phrases; but haven't found any that would
significantly speed up my workflow.

If you haven't already set up a template, I highly recommend it! Since
its a song, you can set up **A LOT** of different things that you find
yourself using frequently (instruments, effects, EQ, tables, etc.).

### Samples {.green}

The M8 **only supports 1 or 2 channel PCM 8, 16, or 24-bit “.wav” 
files**. This is super important to remember, lest you spend
minutes/hours troubleshooting your samples like I did. 😵 If you're like
me, ffmpeg and ffprobe will be your friend and can help you identify 
or convert the samples you have:

<div class="code">
```bash
eric@whiteforest$ ffprobe french-horn_A3_1_fortissimo_normal.wav -select_streams a:0 -hide_banner 2>&1
Input #0, wav, from 'french-horn_A3_1_fortissimo_normal.wav':
  Duration: 00:00:01.38, bitrate: 705 kb/s
  Stream #0:0: Audio: pcm_s16le ([1][0][0][0] / 0x0001), 44100 Hz, 1 channels, s16, 705 kb/s
```
</div>

Looking at that output, you can see that particular sample is actually
in the correct format (1 channel pcm_s16le). I've had other samples that
were much higher bit, and I've had to convert them to get them working
on my M8. The following ffmpeg command can do that for you:

<div class="code">
```bash
eric@whiteforest$ ffmpeg -i super_high_quality.wav -c:a pcm_s16le -sample_fmt s16 -ac 2 -ar 44100 m8_compat.wav

<trimmed output for this post>

eric@whiteforest$ ffprobe m8_compat.wav -select_streams a:0 -hide_banner 2>&1
Input #0, wav, from 'm8_compat.wav':
  Metadata:
    encoder         : Lavf61.1.100
  Duration: 00:00:01.70, bitrate: 1411 kb/s
  Stream #0:0: Audio: pcm_s16le ([1][0][0][0] / 0x0001), 44100 Hz, 2 channels, s16, 1411 kb/s
```
</div>

I won't get into all the different sample formats, but you can read more
about them in the ffmpeg
docs^[<http://trac.ffmpeg.org/wiki/audio%20types> - ffmpeg has a TON of
documentation online and built into the tool(s). At the time of this
writing this page was a useful wiki reference that could be used to
quickly understand audio types and sample formats.]. If ffmpeg is a bit
overkill or hard to understand, the M8 community have come up with many
different sample library organization scripts and converters. One that
I've seen referenced a few times is colonel-blimp's
[sample-shrinker](https://github.com/colonel-blimp/sample-shrinker). I
haven't tried it myself (yet), but it seems to be a pretty useful tool
and only requires Bash and SoX on your Linux/MAC computer. If you're on
a Windows computer without Bash/SoX (WSL2), then you might be able to
use something like bird-inc's
[m8-sample-organizer](https://github.com/birds-inc/m8-sample-organizer).
Again, this is another tool that I haven't used myself (yet...), but its
simply a python script that can be run on a Windows/Linux/MAC computer
to both organize and convert your samples so that they'll work on a M8.
This tool only requires Python and ffmpeg, so it should work on nearly
any modern computer.

If you're willing to spend the extra effort to learn ffmpeg, I highly
recommend it as it will be useful elsewhere and becomes a swiss army
knife for audio and video conversions!

Once the samples are loaded onto your M8, you can further downsample,
slice, normalize, silence, crop, and fade in/out on the sample. I highly
recommend saving multiple copies of your samples on your M8 with
different edits. I've often gone back to my different edits, and was
happy to have saved off multiple copies.

### Saving, Editing, Pasting, Undo {.green}

Saving is important, and you should do it often - that goes for projects
on your M8, a DAW, or anywhere that you could use your work. That being
said, the M8 does have a sort of "autosave" function for your actively
loaded project. I do not know the conditions in which something
would/wouldn't be saved, but I have done something as small as changing
a chain in the song view and then immediately shut down the device, and 
my change was still there when I booted the device back up. This is 
super handy for me, since I often use my M8 at night when I may fall 
asleep while listening to a loop or modifying a song. 😅

If you want to save multiple copies of a song, that's definitely
possible; but be warned that you can't (easily) copy
chains/phrases/instruments/effects/tables between songs. For me, I often
find myself making multiple revisions of a song in a single project,
just skipping down a few rows. You have a total of 256 rows to work
with, and if you're like me, you won't even get close to filling all the
rows, so multiple revisions should fit in one project.

One thing that's mentioned in the manual, but may not be as obvious is
snapshotting. Snapshots can be made in the Mixer or Project views, and
are created by pressing **[SHIFT]+[OPTION]**. A snapshot temporarily 
stores the entire song in memory so you can later restore it if you make
changes that you regret. You can then recall and restore the snapshot
whenever you want by pressing **[SHIFT]+[EDIT]**. The snapshot
functionality essentially gives you and "undo" keypress, and some people
map these to buttons on a midi controller to make the undo more
seamless. There are two caveats to the snapshots that are worth keeping
in mind. First, there is no "redo" so once you restore a snapshot,
that's it, you've lost any edits since that snapshot. Knowing this, you
should be somewhat careful pressing those key combos on the Mixer and
Project views! The second caveat is that snapshots are stored in
volatile memory, so when you power the device off *the snapshot is
lost*. This may be obvious, but its worth calling out - you need to do
some fancy saving to keep the snapshot and your edits (save as another 
project name, restore your snapshot, save as the original name). This is
also the easiest (and only?) way to clear your snapshots.

One last thing to mention is that your renders are saved separately from
your project, and are hard to overwrite. By default triggering renders
will NOT overwrite your older renders. It simply creates a numbered
version of the project name (eg: COOLSONG-2). This not only prevents you 
from accidentally making a mistake and saving over your renders, but it
also makes it easy to quickly render out stems, then re-use them as 
samples in the same song. You can easily try out multiple things and
play with your ideas using rendered stems, and each version will be left
around. This does mean you might be left with a lot of stems when you're
done with a project, so you may want to revisit and clean up
occasionally!

### Tables {.green}

Many people are afraid of tables. They're a weird concept outside of
trackers, but once you get used to them, they can help you build really
interesting effects and automation for your instruments. I'm no tracker
or table pro, but I've forced myself to experiment with them, and have
been able to come up with some cool and interesting sounds by using
them. My main use of tables when I got my M8 was to add a kind of
sidechain, pumping effect by controlling the volume of one instrument
from another. This can now be done by using the TRIG envelope, but, it
was a good exercise to get used to using tables.

One thing that's not entirely obvious when you first look at tables is
that you really can get different effects by slowing down the table TIC
speed. Using super slow speeds can add a completely different
effects/abilities than super fast speeds - play around with it! Fast
speeds are useful for arp-style effects, but tables make it possible to
build a growing and changing effect that isn't tied to a phrase.

It's also worth mentioning that you can put a TIC command in the last
row of an FX column to control the speed of that particular effect.
Along with general speeds, you can set TICFF to get 200hz speed on that
FX column. Normally, the TIC speed is still in sync with the tempo of
the track, but 200hz mode runs at 200hz per tick. I haven't successfully
used this in any tracks myself, but it is a potentially useful trick.

<div class="code">
```bash

  TABLE 00                                        
     N   V   FX1    FX2    FX3              T>120 
  0 >00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00                  
  1  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            1 --- 
  2  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            2 --- 
  3  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            3 --- 
  4  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            4 --- 
  5  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            5 --- 
  6  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            6 --- 
  7  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            7 --- 
  8  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            8 --- 
  9  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00                  
  A  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00                  
  B  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00                  
  C  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00                  
  D  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00                M 
  E  00  --  ---00  ---00  ---00            SCPIT 
  F  00  --  TICFF  ---00  ---00                V 


```
</div>

Like I said, I'm not a pro with tables, and I only have *barely*
scratched the surface. I'd highly recommend watching [Red Means 
Recording's M8 tips 
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QYeM4Dx2kGU&t=630s), or [
Stephen McLeod's intro to tables 
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LSzEt7BwtrM). There are tons of
additional videos on YouTube that dive into tables, and are highly
recommended so that you can get some bearings before diving in yourself!

### Instruments {.green}

I mentioned samples earlier in this article, but there are also tons of 
great built in instruments included in the M8, along with some awesome 
packs created by [Avrilcadabra](https://www.youtube.com/@avrilcadabra),
[Nullsleep](http://nullsleep.com/), [Trash80](https://trash80.com/) (the
creator of the M8!), [mikey303 ](https://soundcloud.com/mikey-303), and
[tobokegao](https://tobokegao.github.io/). Its definitely worth playing
around with the instruments, effects, and envelopes to figure out new 
and interesting sounds. One of the coolest instruments in the
macrosynth, which is based on [Mutable Instruments
Braids](https://pichenettes.github.io/mutable-instruments-documentation/modules/braids/manual/).
There are some strange and out there sounds. One that I've come back to
multiple times this year is the plucked synth, which attempts to
synthesize a plucked string. When you drop the note as low as it can go,
you get a super interesting rattle that works really well as an effect
in tracks. I've used it to emulate voice, animal/alien noises, and
drums. The bowed and blown synths also can acheive somewhat similar
sounds; but don't be afraid to drop into ranges you typically wouldn't
use. Combining the super low notes with envelopes and effects will make
sounds you may not initially expect.

### Other Notes {.green}

One last section for a few final notes I couldn't fit elsewhere!

When building your tracks, you might notice some symbols next to the
name of a chain or phrase. If you see a "\*" next to the name, that
simply means the chain is used again elsewhere in the current phrase. If
you see "^" next to the name, that means the chain is used elsewhere in
the song. These aren't obvious, and I couldn't find them documented
anywhere; but they're super useful when thinking about and trying to
build your song.

## Closing {.yellow}

---

There are tons of additional references, tools, and docs online. A few
that I think are worth mentioning specifically:

- [m8them.es](https://m8them.es) - a cool website with themes that you
  can preview, download, and even push to your M8 (via webUSB).
- [matey](https://www.impbox.net/matey/) - online patch notes for M8
  instruments, sometimes including examples of the sounds that they
generate.
- [Open M8 Tips Tricks and Findings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IpUeR2s9TpkwH9w2lfqfLLkUxLvXcQWipDR046DzOYk/edit#) - 
A shared, open Google Doc that contains **TONS** of different tips,
docs, and references that is super useful for finding new tricks. At the
    time of this writing, it is 49 pages!

The M8 is a great device, and I've honestly only *barely* scratched the
surface of what it can do. There is a huge comunity on
[Discord](https://discord.gg/WEavjFNYHh) with tons of folks who will
help and provide even more tools and resources. As you start looking at
the device, all of the tools, tricks, functions, and comments in the
community could become overwhelming and distracting (even my post could
be a distraction). It's important to remember this is an instrument - 
have fun and use it! Don't get too distracted by all the cool tools, 
scripts, hardware, and other cool things in the M8 ecosystem. They're 
great resources, and great tips, but you also need to use the device! 

If you're on the fence about getting an M8, I'd definitely recommend it!
If you need a taste, or are waiting for a restock, try going
[headless](https://github.com/Dirtywave/M8Docs/blob/main/docs/M8HeadlessSetup.md)!
And if you already have an M8 and want to support it further, support
Tim/Trash80 on Patreon: [https://www.patreon.com/trash80/]()
